## Abstract

We introduce `sencha`, a novel computational method for extracting high-confidence protein-coding sequences from RNA-seq data into non-coding reads and protein-coding reads which can then be manipulated to reduced amino acid alphabets which are directly comparable across large evolutionary distances.
As the direct assignment of protein-coding sequence skips both traditional alignment and gene orthology assignment it can a) be applied to transcriptomes from organisms with no or poorly annotated genomes, and b) identify putative functions of protein sequences contributing to shared cell types.
<!-- Thus, we can identify orthologous cell types while discovering *de novo* orthologous genes across species. -->
Thus, we first leverage short 15-20-long amino acid words in reduced amino acid alphabets to identify homologous cell types across organisms without the need for a reference genome.
Second, we use the homologous cell types from before to find *de novo* homologous genes across all species, within similar cell types.
<!-- this is actually really cool but a fairly complex concept. maybe split it up?

1 very cool idea is that you can, in an automated fashion, leverage the idea of a reduced AA code in K-mers to ID similar cell types across organisms w/o reference genomes

a second cool feature, resulting from the first, is that you can do this discovery piece.

i feel like impact of each gets lost by having such an efficient sentence.. -->

We applied these methods to the problem of understanding the unique ability of bats to harbor zoonotic diseases, especially coronaviruses such as SARS, MERS, SARS-CoV-2, an issue of fundamental importance to human health.
However, important immunological genes such as Interferons have not been adequately identified in the bat genome and thus that aspect of bat biology could not be identified.
With our methods, we were able to detect widespread expression of interferon genes in immune tissues of the SARS reservoir species, and the purported SARS-COV-2 species *Rhinolophus sinicus* (Chinese horseshoe bat) single-cell RNA-seq transcriptomes, as compared to human tissues.
The *R. sinicus* interferon genes were slightly different from human interferon genes [...]
Additionally, we were able to identify a lymphoid-like cell population in the early chordate *Botryllus schlosseri* bulk RNA-seq, an early chordate (divergence ~684 millions of years ago), and validate the expression of the lymphoid genes using [qRT-PCR].
By enabling analyses across divergent species' transcriptomes in a genome-, gene annotation-, and orthology-agnostic manner, `sencha` illustrates the potential of non-model organisms in building the cell type evolutionary tree of life.
