## Introduction {.page_break_before}

<!-- "---" indicates a number or result that is to be filled out -->

### Key sentence: To identify cell types of interest in host organisms, single-cell RNA-seq is a powerful tool, but it is not readily accessible to organisms without well-annotated reference genomes.

The current COVID-19 pandemic has exposed inabilities of understanding zoonotic diseases in wild animals such as bats, due to poorly annotated genomes.
However, the asymptomatic nature of infection in zoonotic host organisms and how it could be applied to humans is of immediate concern.
<!-- non-human host organisms such as the bat *Rhinolophus sinicus*. -->
Zoonoses such as SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 are often harbored in wild animals such as bats, that do not have well annotated genomes, but the asymptomatic nature of infection in those organisms and how it could be applied to humans is of immediate concern, due to the recent SARS, MERS, and Ebola outbreaks, and the current COVID-19 pandemic.
Identifying cell types in these host organisms enables studying the broad array of cell types available to living creatures, and can help understand human disease by seeing cell types that are "normal" in one animal, but resemble human disease cell types.
To identify cell types of interest in host organisms, single-cell RNA-seq is a powerful tool, but it is not readily accessible to organisms without well-annotated reference genomes, as 99.999% of the approximate 10 million animal species predicted to exist on Earth have no submitted genome assembly [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001127; @url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/browse#!/overview/].
Current methods for identifying cell types use single-cell RNA-sequencing, however, require three things: (1) high-quality genome assembly, (2) high-quality predicted gene annotations and (3) high-quality orthologous gene mappings across species.
But, we can nonetheless generate single-cell RNA-seq data from these species with poorly annotated genomes, and if we can leverage the annotations from existing organisms, we can better understand why host animals are able to tolerate infection by a pathogen that is deadly in humans.

### key: The most common strategies for cross-species transcriptomics lose data due to unaligned sequences, unannotated genes, and unmatched genes across species.


There are many strategies for comparative transcriptomics for single cells [@doi:10.3389/fcell.2019.00175].
The most commonly used strategies for cross-species gene expression analyses lose data due to unaligned sequences, unannotated genes, and unmatched genes across species.

Unaligned sequences are largely due to errors in genome assembly, or
While high-quality end-to-end genome assemblies are now within reach with the recently published teleomere-to-telomere human genome assembly [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2547-7], and high-quality assemblies, including gene annotations, will soon be a possibility thanks to thhe efforts of the Vertebrate Genome Project [@https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.22.110833; @https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.30.177956].
While the genome assembly provides substantial informationa bout the genomic structure of a species, it does not yet have the matching genes across species.

### key: Matching genes across species is an open and unsolved problem.

One of the first fundamental step is creating a common gene expression matrix to compare the cell types.
Matching genes across species is perfolrmed via a process called orthologous gene mapping.
A group that is working on this is the Quest for Orthologs Consortium, which has established benchmarking  [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.3830; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa308; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu492; @doi:10.3389/fgene.2017.00165] services.
Another option besides using 1:1 orthologs is using orthogroups [@doi:10.1186/s13059-015-0721-2], aligning genes/reads to a common genome if the species are closely related, such as for primates [@doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1654-9].

and even fewer have gene predictions and orthologous gene mappings to human, which remains an open problem [@doi:10.1038/nrg.2016.127; @doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100616-060818].
The most commonly used strategy is subsetting the matrix down to 1:1 orthologous genes, which already have been computed by a database such as ENSEMBL [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz966; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkz966].
Comparative transcriptomics traditionally relies on orthologous gene mapping, which requires a genome.



Another strategy for more distantly related species is to only use transcription factor genes that are part of "core regulatory complex" (CoRC), which again subsets the data to only certain genes.
Not just at alignment, but at aligning to annotated genes, at subsetting to 1:1 orthologs -- these are all data lossy steps.
While the first two steps are dependent on the genome assembly and gene annotation quailty, the subsetting to 1:1 orthologs cannot be solved with improved assembly and gene annotation tools.
It can be solved with using other strategies for finding orthologous genes.
Another strategy is aligning reads to the native species' genome, and using a tool such as LiftOver to remap coordinates into a well annotated genome such as human, and use those genes.

For all of these tools, the problem with them is that they lose data at every step.
These tools are not available to the 99.9% of vertebrates that do not have a reference genome, but transcriptome work, single-cell RNA-seq data is now so easy to obtain, that people already want to do analyses with their single cell data even if their organism doesn' thave a great reference genome.
And that's what we are enabling.

Once the genomes of the species are obtained, the work is not over.
For each pariwise species comparison, the orthologous genes must be found.
There are many tools for this, such as OrthoFinder [@doi:10.1186/s13059-015-0721-2], eggNOG [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1248; @doi:10.1093/molbev/msx148], and highly curated databases such as ENSEMBL [citation].
The time to run these tools is a long time.
But that's not really the point... what we really care about is using the RNA-seq data directly and not losing data due to mismatched orthology, unannotated genes, or unaligned seuqences.




### key: A method of not losing data due to unaligned sequences or unannotated genes is using all the data in the form of subsampled $k$-mers.


$k$-mers from sequencing data for single cells have been used to show that they can identify single cell types as well as gene counts [@https://doi.org/10.1101/723833].
Recently, there has been literature to use subsampled $k$-mers to identify metagenomes within metagenomic data, but this uses subsampling of the data [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x; @doi:10.21105/joss.00027; @doi:10.12688/f1000research.19675.1].
It turns out that $k$-mers are quite redundant and it is not necessary to use all of them for genome identification.
Specifically, it is possible to use a fractional subsampling of the original data to represent the data faithfully as if all $k$-mers were stored, as implemented in the Sourmash software [@doi:10.21105/joss.00027; @doi:10.12688/f1000research.19675.1].
$k$-mers or k-long substrings have a long history in bioinformatics [@isbn:9780990374633] and have been widely used for genome and transcriptome assembly problems. They were recently applied to metagenomics for taxonomic classification.

We show that we use a subsampled set of the $k$-mers to still identify cell types across and within species.

However, for applying to cell types across species, we add the layer of using reduced amino acid alphabet $k$-mers.

However, for applying to cell types across species, we add the layer of using protein $k$-mers.

### key: Protein sequence can be inferred from RNA-seq due to nullomers.

Nullomers are sequences that are not present in the genome annotation or protein sequences [@doi:10.1142/9789812772435_0034; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0164540; @https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.25.170431; @https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.02.972422] of a species.
While this seems like there are a contradiction between wanting to use all the data, and then only using the data that is present in the database annotation, we show we are able to predict protein coding reads using simulated data.
The signal of a non-protein coding sequence is very obvious -- the true coding frames have k-mers in common with the known database, and the non-true coding frames do not have k-mers in common.
There are only so many k-mers that are compatible with eukaryotic, or mammalian life.
There are amino acid combinations that are not seen in the natural world.
Whether nullomers are not present due to natural selection or due to CpG hypermutability [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001022] remains under debate, there are this phenomena is real and can be exploited to identify putative protein-coding sequences.
By using the "negative space" of unobserved protein sequences, we can identify reading frames of RNA to protein-coding sequences that are unlikely.
Non-productive Reading frames of RNA-seq can be found in the nullomers.
Protein sequences that have been observed are inferred in the k-mers.

### key: Gene annotations can be inferred from RNA-sequencing data, which is easily obtained with commodity tools

What we can do with $k$-mers is use a peripherally related genome to align to, and then extract the protein-coding reads and $k$-mers that are present, then directly compare them.

Transcribed seqeunces in the form of RNA-seq data can be inferred to be transcribed genes for now.


### key: Reduced amino acid alphabets provide a lightweight method of identifying matching genes across species.

Not only do we use protein k-mers, but we use reduced amino acid alphabet k-mers.

Amino acids can be categorized into their biochemical properites.
Many times,a  protein can retain its same phsyical structure and function even with amino acid changes.
These amino acid changes may be retaining the phyiochemical properites of the amino acid.
The space of amino acid substituion was explored back in the 90s to find similarity searches for proteins.
The BLOSUM62, PAM substituion matrices were a method of assigning higher penalties for amino acids that changed their biochemical type.
Reduced amino acid alphabets are a method of reducing blame in changing of amino acid sequences, which is especially compatible with k-mers as if a single letter in a k-mer changes, then the whole k-mer no longer matches.

A method of quickly identifying potential orthologs is using reduced amino acid alphabets [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giz118].
Reduced amino acid alphabets have been used for database searches of related protein sequences [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-159] and for protein structure prediction
[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp164 @doi:10.1093/gigascience/giz118; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/10.4.453; @doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-159; @doi:10.1093/protein/13.3.149; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp164; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkh180]


We combine the two concepts of $k$-mer subsampling and homology identification via reduced amino acid alphabets into what we term "$k$-mer homology."


### key: There is an unmet need to quantitatively compare single-cell transcriptomes across species, without the need for orthologous gene mapping, gene annotations, or a genome assembly.

We translate our protein sequences to protein.
We need to predict protein seuqnece, and turns out most reading frames of RNA don't need to be predicted -- they are already near zero.
They have stop codons.

Thus, there is an unmet need to quantitatively compare single-cell transcriptomes across species, without the need for orthologous gene mapping, gene annotations, or a reference genome.
Short, $k$-long sequence substrings, or $k$-mers, have been proposed for clustering single cells [@url:https://doi.org/10.1101/723833] and here we implemented $k$-mers from putatitvely translated RNA-seq reads with reduced amino acid alphabets [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp164 @doi:10.1093/gigascience/giz118; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/10.4.453; @doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-159; @doi:10.1093/protein/13.3.149; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp164; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkh180], to find shared cell types across species, and further identify *de novo* orthologous genes by querying the predicted protein sequences to a reference database.
This method relies solely on divergence time between species, which we show can be estimated from RNA-seq nucleotide $k$-mers (Supplemental Figure [@sfig:sfig1]).
As the direct assignment of protein-coding sequence skips both traditional alignment and gene orthology assignment it can a) be applied to transcriptomes from organisms with no or poorly annotated genomes, and b) identify putative functions of protein sequences contributing to shared cell types.

We benchmark the prediction of protein-coding sequence using simulated human RNA-seq data from single-copy genes present across all clades of mammals [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351].
We show that one can extract putative protein-coding reads from --- mammalian species in BUSCO, and present the best parameters for different divergence times.

<!-- We first apply this method on a bulk comparative transcriptomic dataset consisting of nine amniote species and six tissues [@doi:10.1038/nature10532], showing that we achieve similar clustering results as using only reads mapping to 1:1 orthologs or Hierarchical Orthologous Groups (HOGs) [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0053786; @doi:10.1093/bib/bbr034; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu492] of protein-coding genes, but are able to resolve ... which can only be seen by using the $k$-mer method. -->
We first demonstrate the utility of this method by comparing lung tissue transcriptomes from organisms diverged by approximately 100 million years ago (MYA) [@url:http://timetree.org/]: mouse from *Tabula Muris Senis* [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2496-1],
Across this evolutionary distance, only --- 1:1 orthologous genes exist as found by ...
<!-- and XX HOGs via orthologous matrix (OMA) [@doi:10.7717/peerj.6231; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx229] -->
We then add single-cell lung data from *Rhinolophus sinicus*, Chinese greater horseshoe bat, whose single-cell transcriptome was recently published [@https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.30.175778]..
Using the $k$-mer homology method, we are able to distinguish the subtypes of T cells in the *R. sinicus* which were hidden using read counts alone, due to $k$-mers from genes not present in the genome assembly.
We then show the ability to find cell type enriched sequences that are absent from the reference genome, in particular interferon pathway genes and natural killer receptor genes.


### key: $k$-mer homology is a transcriptome-first method for cross-species analyses implementing via $k$-mers and reduced amino acid alphabets

Thus, we have shown the reference-free method using the $k$-mers from single cells is a novel, annotation-agnostic method for comparing cells across species that is capable of identifying cell states unique to a particular organism, helping to build the cell type evolutionary tree of life.

Similar to $k$-mer based approaches for transcript quantification [@doi:10.1038/nbt.2862; @doi:10.1038/nbt.3519; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.4197], we implemented $k$-mer based gene expression analyses across species, but instead of using DNA $k$-mers, our critical innovation was using translated protein $k$-mers.
We utilized sequence bloom trees (SBTs) [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3442] using a bottom-up approach to build them similar to previous work [@doi:10.1089/cmb.2017.0265; @doi:10.1089/cmb.2017.0258] to ensure localization of new datasets, meaning, if two leaves share a parent, they are guaranteed to be more similar than two leaves that do not share a parent.

For widespread accessibility and usage, we implemented `leaftea` into two distinct Nextflow pipelines following software best practices such as testing and continuous integration: (1) `nf-core/kmermaid` to compare translated transcriptomes across divergent species, and (2) `czbiohub/nf-predictorthologs` to infer functions of translated sequences.

![
**A.** Overview of single-cell RNA-seq lung tissue datasets from three species: *Homo sapiens* (human), *Rhinolophus sinicus* (Chinese horseshoe bat), and *Mus musculus*.
**B.** Overview of k-mer homology method. First, RNA-seq reads are translated to protein via the leaftea tool, then a cell type database is built from k-mers from the putative protein-coding sequence, given a query cell of a new species, the best matching cell from the model organism database is found, and the cell label is returned.
<!-- **B.** Overview of computational method. First, in the `kmermaid` pipeline, RNA-seq reads are translated to protein via the leaftea tool, then converted to a reduced amino acid alphabet, decomposed into $k$-mers, and then those $k$-mers are subsampled. Next, the `nf-predictorthologs` pipeline performs differential $k$-mer expression, much like differential gene expression, to find $k$-mers that are enriched in a population, and queries for those differential $k$-mers in databases to identify them. -->
](images/SVG/figure1.svg){#fig:fig1 width="100%"}
