
## Results



### Reliable identification of putative protein-coding sequence with `leatea translate` across ~150 million years of evolution

| Amino acid              | Property              | Dayhoff |
|:------------------------|:----------------------|:--------|
| `C`                     | Sulfur polymerization | `a`     |
| `A`, `G`, `P`, `S`, `T` | Small                 | `b`     |
| `D`, `E`, `N`, `Q`      | Acid and amide        | `c`     |
| `H`, `K`, `R`           | Basic                 | `d`     |
| `I`, `L`, `M`, `V`      | Hydrophobic           | `e`     |
| `F`, `W`, `Y`           | Aromatic              | `f`     |
Table: Dayhoff encoding of amino acids by categories of biochemical properties, into a six-letter alphabet. Adapted from [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-9-367]. For example, the protein sequence `LIVING` would become `eeeecb`. {#tbl:dayhoff-alphabet}

![
Application of $k$-mer homology to mammalian lung cell type identification recapitulates known biology and identifies enriched genes not present in reference genome assembly.
**A.** Overview of `leaftea translate` method. First, each read is translated into all six possible protein-coding translation frames. Next, reading frames with stop codons are eliminated. Each protein-coding frame is $k$-merized, then the fraction of $k$-mers which appear in the known protein-coding database is computed. Reading frames containing 5% or more $k$-mers matching the reference proteome are inferred to be putatively protein-coding.
**B.** Experimental set up to identify best $k$-mer sizes for translating protein-coding sequence, given a reference proteome of divergent organism. First, human RNA-seq reads were simulated from genes present in all extant mammals. Next, we used highly curated reference proteomes from BUSCO Mammalia, representing almost 200 million years of evolution, across a wide range of mammalian species. Using `leaftea`, we partition the reads into protein-coding and noncoding using a variety of amino acid alphabets and $k$-mer sizes, and then compute classification metrics.
**C.** Predictive power of detecting protein-coding sequence across ~200 million years of evolution, using simulated human RNA-seq reads and mammalian reference proteomes. x-axis, $k$-mer size used to translate the RNA sequence; y-axis, receiver operating characteristic area under the curve (ROC AUC) of protein-coding prediction at that $k$-mer size. Dotted vertical lines indicate $k$-mer size producing maximum ROC AUC for each divergence time.
**D.** Classification metrics of protein-coding prediction with both protein and Dayhoff alphabets, using best-performing $k$-mer sizes for each alphabet from (**C**). Left, precision; middle, recall; right, $F_{1/2}$ score. x-axis, Estimated divergence time of reference proteome relative to human, from timetree.org; y-axis, value of classification metric.
](images/SVG/figure2.svg){#fig:fig2 width="100%"}

To extract putative protein coding sequences from RNA-seq reads, we first established whether we could predict protein-coding sequences from simulated human RNA-seq data.
We reliably identified putative protein-coding reads using our tool, `leaftea`.
`leaftea` works by performing six frame translation of RNAs, discarding reading frames with stop codons, and decomposing each frame into amino acid $k$-mers, and checking for the $k$-mer present in the reference proteome (Fig. {@fig:fig1}A).
In detecting putative protein coding sequence, there many be small amino acid changes that do not change the overall function of the protein, and to accommodate this, we offer the option to translate using either the original 20-letter amino acid alphabet, or a six-letter reduced amino acid alphabet, the Dayhoff encoding [@tbl:dayhoff-alphabet].
As many organisms of interest are not annotated, but a different organism with a related ancestor is, we wanted to understand the limits of protein-coding detection when the best-annotated organism in the database is divergent with up to approximately 200 million years.
To test this, we simulated human RNA-seq data from genes present in all extant mammals as determined by BUSCO [@doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-9173-0_14], and used reference proteomes from eighteen mammals, ranging in divergence from 0 to almost 200 MYA [@url:timetree.org] (Fig. {@fig:fig1}B).
We found that we were able maximize classification power, measured via receiver operating characteristic area under the curve (ROC AUC), for most divergence times for a protein alphabet with a $k$-mer size of 8, and a $k$-mer size of 17 for a Dayhoff encoding (Fig. {@fig:fig1}C, left and middle).
Across all mammals tested, it was clear that some were better annotated than others based on the ROC AUC curves (Supplemental Fig. {@fig:sfig1}).
For example, hedgehog (*Erinaceus europaeus*) had more successful protein-prediction than species with similar divergence times from human such as rhino (*Ceratotherium simum simum*), even though both are members of Boroeutheria, a mangnorder of mammals with a most recent common ancestor at an estimated 96 MYA of one another [@url:timetree.org], containing the superorders Euarchontoglires (includes rodents and primates) and Laurasiatheria (includes bat, hedgehog, hooved animals, cats, and dogs).
We found that a protein alphabet with a $k$-mer size of 8 was most productive in translating the sequences for closely related species, within Boroeutheria, with a mean ROC AUC of 0.873898 among well-annotated reference proteomes.
For more distantly related species such as platypus (*Ornithorhynchus anatinus*), a the Dayhoff alphabet had a ROC AUC of 0.547203.
<!-- , however, the precision of rejecting non-coding reads remained quite high across distantly related species (Fig. {@fig:fig1}D, left). -->
Interested in understanding whether `leaftea`'s strength lies in detecting true protein-coding reads, or eliminating non-coding reads, we computed the precision and recall of protein-coding classification (Fig. {@fig:fig1D}, left and middle).
Our precision to remove non-coding reads is quite high, especially with the Dayhoff alphabet, which retains a high precision even for the platypus proteome, which is approximately 177 MYA diverged from human.
As this metric performs better in precision, we used an $F_{\beta}$ score, where $\beta = 1/2$, to indicate a 2x preference for precision over recall (Fig. {@fig:fig1}D, right).
<!-- Interested in understanding whether `leaftea`'s strength lies in detecting true protein-coding reads, or eliminating non-coding reads, we computed the precision and recall of protein-coding classification (Fig. {@fig:fig1D}).
We found that
Using the reference proteomes from different animals represents extracting protein-coding reads from an organisms whose closely related species in the reference database is 10, 50, etc million years diverged.
Using the reference proteomes, we found that a small fraction of overlapping $k$-mers in the putative protein-coding read were required to identify the read as putatively protein-coding. Our sensitivity to remove non-coding reads is quite high.
We chose a minimum containment threshold of 0.05 as this maximized the number of putative protein coding reads while successfully discarding non-coding reads. -->
This shows that while it is possible to detect putative protein-coding sequence, reliably rejecting non-coding sequences, even when the best annotated organism in the database almost 200 million years diverged from the query organism.


<!-- Putative protein-coding reads from simulated Human RNA-seq data can be identified across the mammalian lineage -->

### Degenerate amino acid alphabet $k$-mers identify common cell types across species and finds genes absent from even well-annotated genomes





![
**A.** Experimental set up to validate effectiveness of building a cell type database from one species, to label cells from another species. First, we build a cell type database using sequence bloom trees (SBTs) from mouse cells, then search using a human cell for the best matching mouse cell.
**B.** Mean of classification metrics across mouse:human cell type lookup experiments, highlighting the $k$-mer size that maximizes the mean for each metric and alphabet. Vertical lines, standard deviation of the mean. x-axis, $k$-mer size in DNA space, i.e. a $k$-mer size of 21 corresponds to a an amino acid length of 7. y-axis, value of classification metric. Left, adjusted rand score; right, F1 score.
**C.** Molecules and $k$-mer sizes maximizing classification metrics from (**E**).
**D.** Confusion matrices of classification using Dayhoff encoding and $k$-mer size of ---, the best performing metrics from (**E**). x-axis, predicted cell label; y-axis, ground truth cell label.
](images/SVG/figure3.svg){#fig:fig3 width="100%"}


#### key: Dayhoff-encoded $k$-mers reliably predict cell types within species

To test identification of cell types using $k$-mers, we first tested the method within species, with three main questions: Do the parameters change when the cell type lookup is within the same individual, across individual of the same sex, and across individuals of different sex?
<!-- Previous work has used $k$-mers from protein-coding genes of single-cell RNA-seq data within one individual of a species to distinguish cell types [@https://doi.org/10.1101/723833], and we are interested in first comparing effectiveness of $k$-mers to identify cell types across individuals of different species. -->
To test this, we built cell type databases from $k$-mer signatures using sequence bloom trees (SBTs) [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3442] using the `sourmash` software tool [@doi:10.12688/f1000research.19675.1; @doi:10.21105/joss.00027].
Using the Tabula Muris Senis data, we built a cell type database from one mouse, and queried its own cells (Supplementary Fig. {@fig:sfig2}A).
We first manually unified cell ontology class names into broader groups to encompass larger cell type labels.
We then created $k$-mer signatures at many $k$-mer sizes, from 21 to 90, using the raw nucleotide sequence from the RNA-seq reads, the `leaftea`-translated protein sequence, or a Dayhoff-encoded version of the `leaftea` translated sequences.
To reduce batch effects, we removed $k$-mers from technical artifact genes, such as ribosomal and mitochondrial genes, and genes associated with single-cell dissociation [@doi:10.1038/s41467-017-02772-x; @doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.10.037; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.4437; @doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02032-0; @https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.30.178673].
Similar to previous work [@https://doi.org/10.1101/723833], we find that using DNA from coding nucleotides successfully distinguishes cell types within individuals of the same species.
However, we see that even within an individual using the `leaftea`-translated protein sequences re-encoded into the Dayhoff alphabet outperforms using the DNA alphabet (Supplementary Fig. {@fig:sfig2}D,E), suggesting that there are enough differences in amplification or sequencing errors to warrant a degenerate protein alphabet, even within individuals of the same species.
<!-- We found that a $k$-mer size of --- with DNA had the best [F1 score / Adjusted Rand Index (ARI)] of --- cell type classification within one male mouse. -->
Interested in how the genomic differences across individuals affect DNA-based cell type classification, we built a cell type database from one male mouse, and queried a cell and returned its most similar matching cell (Supplementary Fig. {@fig:sfig2}B), and again the protein and Dayhoff alphabets outperformed the DNA alphabets (Supplementary Fig. {@fig:sfig2}D-F).<!-- We found that across mice, the DNA was still able to identify cell types, but the protein $k$-mers had a higher F1 score of ---. -->
Finally, we also tested a male-female comparison (Supplementary Fig. {@fig:sfig2}C), where the cell database was built from male cells, and the query was female cells, and found again that the Dayhoff alphabet outperformed all other alphabets (Supplementary Fig. {@fig:sfig2}D,G).
To compare across the three experiments, we averaged the adjusted rand and F1 scores (Supplementary Fig. {@fig:sfig2}H) and found that a Dayhoff encoding with a $k$-mer size of 39, corresponding to a peptide length of 13, maximized the F1 scores to 0.799 (Supplementary Fig. {@fig:sfig2}I).<!-- We were able to identify cell types across mice by using DNA $k$-mers of size --- and protein $k$-mers of size --- and Dayhoff $k$-mers of size ---. -->
Curious which cell types were most commonly mis-categorized, we created confusion matrices (Supplementary Fig. {@fig:sfig2}J-L) and found that the most often misclassified cell type was Natural Killer T cells, which were classified to T cells by our method.
Within cell compartments of epithelial, endothelial, myeloid and lymphoid, we had the fewest misclassifications with a --- alphabet and k-mer size of ---.
As these cell types are often difficult to distinguish, we felt this was sufficient to show the utility of Dayhoff-encoded amino acid $k$-mers to identify cell types within a species.
Thus, we find that Dayhoff-encoded `leaftea`-translated $k$-mers with a DNA $k$-mer size of 39 works well to "soften the rough edges" introduced by individual genomic variation for cell types and can be used to identify similar cell types within and across individuals of the same species.



#### key: Human cell types can be predicted from mouse cells using $k$-mers from reduced amino acid alphabets

<!-- Given putative protein-coding sequences from RNA-seq reads, we now use reduced amino acid alphabets as a lightweight substitute for homology across species. -->
To recapitulate known biology in the mammalian lung, we compared lung cell atlases from species related within the mammalian suborder Euarchontoglires, whose most recent common ancestor is between 85 to 95 million years ago, we applied these methods to a mouse single-cell RNA-seq atlas, *Tabula Muris Senis* [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2496-1], to a human
lung cell atlas [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2922-4].
Next, we show that we can identify cell types in human RNA-seq data from mouse cell type databases.
We built a cell type database from the 18-month old mouse Lung tissue in Tabula Muris Senis, and queried with human lung cells (Fig. {@fig:fig2}A).
<!-- Maybe this is for the supplemental text? -->
<!-- Across human-to-mouse, we found that DNA $k$-mers which vary quite greatly across species, were too variable to use to identify cell types. -->
<!-- Instead, we found that even protein $k$-mers cannot reliably identify cell types across species.
We turned to reduced amino acid alphabets such as Dayhoff (Fig. {@fig:fig2}A). -->
We found that a Dayhoff encoding with a minimum $k$-mer size of 36 maximized the Adjusted Rand index (0.300) and the F1-scores (0.565) for classification of cell types across human and mouse (Fig. {@fig:fig2}B-C).
Curious what the common misclassifications were, we plotted confusion matrices of the ground truth of human cells, compared to what they were predicted by the mouse cell type database (Fig. {@fig:fig2}D).



<!-- Comparison to other methods?? -->

To compare the performance of $k$-mer homology to traditional cross-species methods, we used --- tools to compare label propagation across species using 1:1 orthologous gene datasets.
We found that using 1:1 orthologs was not good and resulted in a classification adjusted rand index score of --- which was not good.
This enables finding expression of genes that may not be defined in the genome, and certainly genes that do not appear, are excluded by, subsetting to 1:1 orthologs, which is a common strategy for cross-species transcriptome comparisons.



#### key: Reduced amino acid alphabet $k$-mers enable identifying cell type enriched sequences that may not be present in gene annotation, genome assembly, or orthologous gene mappings

Once we identified common cell types across species, we then dug into genes that are enriched in the cell types that may not be present even in the annotated genome, or present in the orthologous gene mapping (Fig. {@fig:fig2}E).
To find expression of genes that many not be in the genome, we took two approaches.
First, we used differential $k$-mer expression to enrich for particular sequences that were highly expressed in a cell type.
We found that the overlap between differential gene expression 1:1 orthologs, and the differential $k$-mer expression and orthogroup expression, we found --- % overlap between al three, which had a --- p-value of significance using a chi-squared or hypergeometric test of enrichment.
Additionally, we identified --- genes that were enriched in molecular cell types that are not present in the genomes of human and mouse.
Specifically, we found an unannotated *pulmonary surfactant-associated protein A* gene in the Alveolar Type 2 cells, which makes sense since they express many surfactants.
We found that compared to gene expression, we had a ---% overlap with the genes that are known to be enriched by gene expression of 1:1 orthologs, and we found --- genes that were enriched in the cell types but were not 1:1 orthologs, and thus would have been missed by traditional methods.
Second, we used $k$-mers from orthogroups, orthologous groups of genes, defined at the mammalian clade, of genes with common function across species [cite orthogroups paper], computed signatures for the last 100aa of each amino acid sequence of orthogroups to get a relative gene expression (Fig. {@fig:fig2}F) using containment search [@url:https://github.com/dib-lab/2020-paper-sourmash-gather].
However, with the $k$-mers, we were able to find genes such as ---, --- and --- which are enriched in the cell type ---, but are not a 1:1 ortholog, and are instead a --- ortholog.
Some of these were even not present in the genome assembly, for example --- is present in the human genome assembly but not in the mouse assembly.
Thus, using $k$-mers, we are able to identify genes that are enriched in cell types but are not present in the genome assembly, in unannotated genes, or not 1:1 orthologs.




### Reduced amino acid $k$-mers from transcriptomes enabled identification of unannotated immune genes in Chinese horseshoe bat suggesting immune adaptations

We refined the lung cell type annotation from the Chinese horseshoe bat using our $k$-mer based cell type label propagation method. Using these refined labels, we found that --- in the bat cell types were more similar to --- classical monocytes --- in mouse and human than they tended to be to their original cell types (Fig. {@fig:fig3}A).
This led us to then perform differential expression to find the genes that may be enriched in the bat cell types overall.
Using both logistic regression on the $k$-mer abundances, and expression of orthogroups containment in the cells, we found --- genes were broadly expressed in the bat, as compared to mouse and human (Fig. {@fig:fig3}B).
We then dug into the genes that are expressed, but not found in the aligned genome or the gene annotation, and found that --- gene was a key contributor to --- natural killer cell --- type identity.

- Mouse:bat
  - celltype mapping
- mouse:bat:human
  - Identify gene expression for genes missing in genome


To identify molecular cell types unique to the Chinese horseshoe bat within mammals, we added a multi-organ, whole organism single-cell RNA-seq atlas of *R. sinicus*. We found expression of interferon genes, which have not been identified in the bat genome, but we were able to detect them in the transcriptome. In the bat scrnaseq paper, they performed qPCR to show expression of interferon genes, even though they weren't identified in the genome, to show those genes do truly exist.

To apply the method to a novel biological problem and create insights into previously unknown biology, we applied the $k$-mer homology method to a recently published cell atlas of the Chinese horseshoe bat, *R. sinicus* [@https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.30.175778].
