
## Discussion

### key: Single-cell atlases need to be made accessible to the 99% of non-model organisms


<!-- The increasing accessibility of single-cell RNA-seq data  provides a  -->
The availability of single-cell whole organism atlases [cite: tabula muris, tabula muris senis, MCA, HCA papers] enables rapid cell type identification in new datasets.
However, this cell type identification is not readily accessible to the 99.99% of animal species without a reference genome [cite vertebrate genome paper].
Indeed, 99.99% of the planet's rapidly decreasing number of animal species [cite climate change, extinction papers] are unable to directly benefit from the cell typing efforts due to a combination of both lack of a reference genome, and understudied organisms that do not readily have gene mappings across species annotated.
Thus, there is an urgent need for methods that leverage model organism cell atlases for understudied animals.
It's not just about the genome. The annotation and the orthology of gene annotations mapping across species is the really critical thing for cross-species analyses.
We developed a method to address the gap between model organisms cell atlases and the understudied organisms that may provide with novel cures for disease.

### key: Putative protein-coding sequence can be detected across ~150 million years of evolution

First, we extracted putative protein-coding sequence from an understudied animal, the Chinese horseshoe bat, *R. sinicus*.
First, we demonstrated the ability to discard unlikely protein-coding frames from RNA-seq data using our tool, `leaftea`.
Our precision is high, meaning we are able to discard true non-coding frames very easily.
Even for species that are distantly related, ~150 million years between human and the distantly related platypus species, we were able to reject ---% of the known non-coding frames from the simulated human data.
The most distantly related organism, platypus, with an estimated divergence time from human ranging from 167-192 million years (@url:timetree.org), was able to identify true protein-coding sequence in human ---% of the time.
Thus, we are able to recover the putative protein coding sequences, even when the most recent ancestor of the closest related organism in the database is within ~150 million years, meaning we can study any mammal.
This indicates that even if the organism is --- million years diverged from the most closely related organism in the database, it is still possible to recover putative protein-coding.
Thus, this opens up the possibility of studying nearly ---% of organisms on the planet, as most are related within 150 million years of annotated organisms. [Olga: Ask Erich Schwarz for help on how to compute this]

<!-- With the increasing accessibility of single-cell RNA-seq, it is more and more challenging to organize existing data.
 but the analysis of said data is more and more difficult if the organism is not well anotated in the databses. -->

<!-- [What iss the average distance between unknown/unannotated organisms and annotated organisms? Can this be quantified?]
We used RNA-seq data directly due to the fact that we can extract putative protein-coding sequences from the RNA-seq data. -->




### key: Cell type databases built on protein k-mers can assign cell types across individuals within species

### key: Reduced amino acid alphabet k-mers enable lighweight orthology assignment

### key: Cell type databases built on reduced amino acid alphabet protein k-mers can assign cell types across species


### key: Lightweight orthology assignment using $k$-mers enabled reference-independent cross-species RNA-seq analyses and achieved insight into unannotated genes and genes absent from the genome assembly.

We implemented the concept of lightweight orthology assignment using $k$-mers to the problem of cross-species RNA-seq analyses and achieved insight into unannotated genes and genes absent from the genome assembly.
By removing the orthology inference step, `kmermaid` opens up the possibility of finding shared and divergent tissue and cell types across a broad range of species, paving the way for evolutionary analyses of cell types across species.
`kmermaid` can be used in *de novo* setting for non-model organisms, finding similar cell types within an organism, or finding similar cell types relative to a reference organism, without the need for a reference genome or transcriptome.
The memory usage of `kmermaid` is quite low, using only ---MB for extracting coding sequences and 50MB for assigning protein $k$-mer signatures.
As the number of RNA-seq datasets, especially single-cell RNA-seq datasets continues to grow, we expect `kmermaid` to be widely used for identifying cell types in non-model organisms.


### key: Reduced amino acid alphabet k-mer enrichment allowed for inserting /identifying genes that were not present in the genome assembly or gene annotation, or gene orthology

We were able to identify putative homologs across species by finding genes that were enriched in common cell types

### key: We built an orthologous gene tree and were able to identify genes in cells across all species
<!-- Is this a separate paper? -->
Using orthogroups, we built a signature tree database of orthologous genes.
We then were able to quantify gene expression
We were able to detect genes that were not present in the genome, but were present in the orthologous genes databases.
We were thus able to directly compare cell types across species with a common set of orthologous genes.
We used sourmash gather to identify genes that were expressed across multiple cell types

### In summary, we developed a method to identify cell types in a non-model organism using a reference atlas from another organism, without the need for a genome or gene annotation from the non-model organism.

In summary, we developed a method to identify both known cell types in a non-model organism using a reference atlas from another organism, without the need for a genome or gene annotation from the non-model organism.
This method can be used to combine single-cell cell atlases from well-annotated,  model organisms, with sequencing data from poorly annotated non-model organisms, to directly find homologous cell types and orthologous genes.
By eliminating read alignment and orthologous gene mapping, `kmermaid` enables comparison of transcriptomes of the remaining 99.999% Eukaryotic species on Earth without submitted genome assemblies, with the cell atlases of a handful of model organisms to identify shared and novel cell types, and *de novo* identify orthologous genes.
By identifying homologous cell types across a broad variety of species, we come closer to an understanding of the evolution of genes, cells, and thus life itself.

`kmermaid` is free and open-source software and is available as Supplementary Data and at http://github.com/czbiohub/kmermaid and as a scalable Nextflow workflow at http://github.com/nf-core/nf-kmermaid.

We have provided pre-built cell type databases of *Tabula Muris Senis* at ---.
