### Pipelines

<!-- ## Figure 3 -- Overview of `kmermaid` and `predictorthologs` pipelines -->

![**A.** Overview of the `kmermaid` pipeline. (**a**, **b**, **c**) `kmermaid` consists of a protein-coding prediction phase (**a**) that is invoked by the command `sencha translate`, a k-mer sketch computation phase (**b**) invoked by the command `sourmash sketch`, a signature similarity comparison phase (**c**) invoked by the command `sourmash compare`, and an optional database-creation phase (**d**) invoked by the command `sourmash index`. The coding prediction phase has three components: (1) six-frame translation, removal of stop-codon frames, and subsequent $k$-merization of RNA-sequencing reads; (2) a degenerate protein alphabet which allows for protein-coding detection from a wide variety of species; (3) a bloom filter containing known protein-coding sequences from a well annotated organism; and (4) computation of the Jaccard index of translated RNA-seq reading frames. The sketch computation phase involves randomly subsetting the degenerate peptide $k$-mers using a MinHash algorithm. The sketch comparison phase consists of computing the Jaccard intersection of MinHashed degenerate peptide $k$-mers between all pairs of samples.](images/SVG/supplementary_figure3.svg){#fig:sfig3 width="100%"}


![
Supplemental Figure X.
**A.** Overview of `nf-core/kmermaid` pipeline to compare DNA/RNA/protein sequences on k-mer content.
1. If input is bam, extract per-cell sequences using `bam2fasta percell`.
2. Predict amino acid sequence of each RNA-seq read using `sencha translate`.
3. Randomly subsample amino acid k-mers via MinHash using `sourmash sketch`.
4. Compare all k-mer sketches to one another using `sourmash compare` to compute cell-cell Jaccard similarities.
5. Build sequence bloom tree using `sourmash index`.
6. Build k-nearest neighbor graph using sequence bloom tree.
7. Build UMAP off of KNN.
](images/SVG/kmermaid_workflow.svg){#fig:kmermaid width="100%"}



![
Supplemental Figure X.
**B.** Overview of `czbiohub/nf-predictorthologs` pipeline to query putative function of protein sequences.
1. If input is bam, must also have a convert bam reads to raw fastq files using the `samtools fastq` subcommand (samtools version 1.9). If input is fastqs, go directly to second step.
2. Trim adapters, poly-A, polyG using the `fastp` tool.
3. Predict protein-coding sequence using khtools extract_coding, using conservative UniProt/SwissProt manually curated database as examples of known protein-coding sequences, for most stringent definition of protein-coding.
4. Query predicted protein in permissive NCBI RefSeq non-redundant protein database for most complete search query.
](images/SVG/predictorthologs_workflow.svg){#fig:predictorthologs width="100%"}
